# 2.4 Malicious Activity

## Malware Attacks
- malware is malicious software

#### Ransomware
- Attackers affect your data with malware making it unavailable until you provide cash/payment.
- Protect against ransomware:
  - backups
  - keep everything up to date
    - applications
    - anti-virus/anti-malware 

#### Trojan
- Malicious software disguised as legitimate programs.
- Examples:
  - Remote Access Trojan (RAT): 
    - Allows attackers to remotely control the victim's system.
  - Banking Trojans: 
    - Steal financial information like login credentials.
  - Downloader Trojans: 
    - Download and install additional malicious software.
  - Backdoor Trojans: 
    - Create unauthorized access for attackers to re-enter systems.
  - Infostealer Trojans: 
    - Harvest sensitive data like passwords and personal information.
  - Rootkits: 
    - Sometimes used by Trojans to hide their presence on a system

#### Worm
- Malware that self-replicates
  - It doesn't need you at all to start
  - Self-propagates and spreads quickly
- Spreads through the network
- Can take over many systems very quickly
- Protection:
  - Firewalls and IDS/IPS can mitigate many worm infestations 
    - Doesn’t help much once the worm gets inside

#### Spyware
- Malware that spies on you
  - Advertising, identity theft, affiliate fraud
- Can trick you into installing
  - Peer to peer, fake security software
- Browser monitoring
  - Capture surfing habits
- Keyloggers
  - Capture every keystroke
  - Send your keystrokes back to the attacker

#### Bloatware
- Applications that come by default on a new device or machine.
- These apps you don't need and they take up resources and storage space 

#### Virus
- Malware that can reproduce itself
  - It needs you to execute a program to start virus
- Reproduces through file systems or the network
  - Just running a program can spread a virus
- Types:
  - Program viruses 
    - It’s part of the application
  - Boot sector viruses 
    - Who needs an OS?
  - Script viruses 
    - Operating system and browser-based 
  - Macro viruses 
    - Common in Microsoft Office
  - Fileless virus
    - stealth attack, operates in memory
- Protection:
  - Keep anti-virus signatures up to date for protection


#### Keylogger
- Capture every keystroke and send it to bad guys
- Your keystrokes contain valuable information
  - Web site login URLs, passwords, email messages
- Other data logging:
  - Clipboard logging, screen logging, instant messaging, search engine queries
- Protection:
  - Electronic monitoring
    - Alert on changes
    - Host-based intrusion detection, Tripwire, etc.
  - Constant auditing

#### Logic Bomb
- this malware waits for a specific event to occur then it will detonate
  - may wait for a specific date or time, or specific user activity

#### Rootkit
- malware that modifies core system files
  - part of OS kernel
- can be invisible and difficult to notice
- Protection:
  - Secure boot with UEFI 
    - Security in the BIOS
  - unusual activity on Anti-malware scans

---

## Physical Attacks
- If you have physical access to a server, you have full control
- Door locks keep out the honest people 
  - There’s always a way in

#### Brute Force
- Push through the obstruction 
  - Brawn beats brains
- Check your physical security
  - Check the windows, try the doors
- Attackers will try everything
  - You should be prepared for anything

#### Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Cloning
- RFID is everywhere 
  - Access badges, key fobs
- Duplicators are on Amazon
- The duplication process takes seconds 
  - Read one card, copy to another
- This is why we have MFA
  - Use another factor with the card

#### Environmental 
- Attack everything supporting the technology 
  - The operating environment/structure
- Power off the devices (electricity attack)
- HVAC (Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning) and humidity controls
  - Large data centers must be properly cooled
- Fire suppression
  - Watch for smoke or fire

---

## Network Attacks

#### Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
- Force a service to fail 
  - Overload the service
- Cause a system to be unavailable
- Can be a smokescreen for some other exploit
- Can be simple as turn off the power
- Uses amplification and reflection techniques

##### Amplified 
- Exploits services that generate large responses from small requests.
- The attacker sends small, spoofed requests (from the victim’s IP) to servers that reply with much larger responses.
- The victim gets overwhelmed by a flood of large responses, amplifying the attack’s strength.

##### Reflected
- Involves tricking intermediate systems (reflectors) into sending responses to a victim.
- The attacker spoofs the victim’s IP address in requests to legitimate servers.
- These servers respond, but the responses go to the victim instead of the attacker.

#### Domain Name System (DNS) Attacks

##### DNS poisoning
- An attack that inserts false DNS information to redirect users to malicious sites.
- Modify the DNS server
- Modify the client host file

##### Domain Hijacking
- Get access to the domain registration, and you have control where the traffic flows
- Many ways to get into the account:
  - Brute force
  - Social engineer the password
  - Gain access to the email address that manages the account.
  - etc.

##### URL hijacking
- Attack where users are tricked into visiting malicious or unintended websites by exploiting mistyped or similar-looking domain names (also called typosquatting).

#### Wireless
- 802.11
  - Wireless network frames used for establishing and maintaining communication between devices, including actions like authentication, association, beacons, and deauthentication.
  - 802.11w is required for 802.11ac compliance
- Radio frequency (RF) jamming
  - this is a denial of Service
    - Prevent wireless communication
  - Transmit interfering wireless signals
  - Interference is not intentional, but Jamming is.

#### On-Path
- Formerly known as man-in-the-middle
  - Redirects your traffic
  - Then passes it on to the destination
  - You never know your traffic was redirected
- The attacker secretly intercepts, relays, and potentially alters communication between two parties, making it seem as if they are communicating directly.
- The goal is often to steal sensitive data, inject malicious content, or impersonate one of the parties in real time.

#### Credential Replay
- The attacker intercepts valid login credentials (e.g., through network sniffing or phishing) and reuses them later to gain unauthorized access.
- Focuses on capturing and reusing credentials rather than manipulating communication.

##### On Path vs Credential Replay
- A replay attack reuses credentials without necessarily modifying communication, while an on-path attack actively manipulates the data stream between the victim and a legitimate party.

#### Malicious Code
- Malicious code are varied and many
- Many different forms:
  - Executable, scripts, macro viruses, worms, Trojan
horse, etc.

---

## Application Attacks

#### Injection
- Code injection
  - Adding your own information into a data stream
- Enabled because of bad programming
  - The application should properly handle input and
output
- So many different injectable data types   
  - HTML, SQL, XML, LDAP, etc.

##### SQL Injection (SQLi)
- Put your own SQL requests into an existing application 
- Your application shouldn’t allow this
- Can often be executed in a web browser 
  - Inject in a form or field

#### Buffer overflows
- Overwriting a buffer of memory
  - Spills over into other memory areas

#### Replay
- The attacker intercepts valid login credentials (e.g., through network sniffing or phishing) and reuses them later to gain unauthorized access.
- Focuses on capturing and reusing credentials rather than manipulating communication.

#### Privilege Escalation
- Gain higher-level access to a system
- Higher-level access means more capabilities

#### Cross-site Request Forgery (CSRF)
- An attack where a malicious website tricks a user's browser into making unauthorized requests to another site where the user is authenticated, performing actions without the user's consent.
- Basically, allowing attackers to perform actions on behalf of authenticated users without their knowledge.

#### Directory Traversal
- Read files from a web server that are outside of the
website’s file directory
- Users shouldn’t be able to browse the Windows folder

---

## Cryptographic Attacks

#### Birthday Attack
- An attack that exploits the probability of two different inputs producing the same hash value
  - birthday paradox (same birthdays). 
- This attack can be used to find collisions in hash functions, compromising data integrity and security.

#### Downgrade
- An attack where an attacker forces a connection to revert to a less secure version of a protocol or weaker encryption method
- Allows for exploiting vulnerabilities in older systems to compromise security.

#### Collision
- Hash functions when two distinct inputs produce the same hash output, undermining the hash function's integrity and making it vulnerable to attacks such as the birthday attack.

---

## Password Attacks

#### Spraying
- Trying a small number of common passwords across multiple user accounts, rather than targeting a single account with many passwords.

#### Brute Force
- Try every possible password combination until the hash is matched

---

## Indicators
- Indicators of your account being compromised

#### Account Lockout
- Credentials are not working
- Exceeded login attempts
- Account was administratively disabled

#### Concurrent Session Usage
- Account is logged in two places at one time.
- Multiple account logins from multiple locations

#### Blocked Content
- The attacker will want to block security to stay on the account as long as possible.
- They will block the user account from:
  - Auto-update connections
  - Links to security patches
  - Third-party anti-malware sites 
  - Antivirus Removal tools

#### Impossible Travel
- Logged in from one location, then log off, then log back in from many miles/states/or countries away within minutes.
  - this is impossible

#### Resource Consumption
- Overwhelm a system, application, or network resources causing degradation in performance
- Take notice if your computer is slow.

#### Resource Inaccessibility
- Unable to access required resources (such as data, services, or applications) due to attacks

#### Out-of-Cycle Logging
- Generating log entries outside of the regular logging schedule

#### Published/Documented
- The entire attack and data exfiltration may go unnoticed
- Company data may be published online
  - The attackers post a portion or all data
- This may be in conjunction with ransomware

#### Missing Logs
- Log information is evidence
- Attackers will try to cover their tracks by removing logs